---
layout: post
title: "How to Install the Private Internet Access App On Solus"
date: 2020-05-08 23:40 -500
category: linux
---

### 1

Step one is to head on over to the [Private Internet Access download page](https://www.privateinternetaccess.com/pages/download).

That'll give you a `.run` file. Save it to your ~/Downloads directory.

### 2

Open up a terminal, cd to your Downloads directory, and make the `.run` file executable.

```bash
chmod +x pia-linux-*.*.*-*.run
```

### 3

Before running the installer, we are going to create two symbolic links so the PIA installer does not complain. Solus is structured a bit differently than most other Linux distributions.

```bash
sudo mkdir -p /usr/local
sudo ln -s /usr/bin /usr/local/bin
sudo ln -s /usr/share/defaults/iproute2/ /etc/iproute2
```

### 4

Run the file in your terminal and follow through the install instructions. Should go smoothly without errors.

```bash
./pia-linux-*.*.*-*.run
```

### 5

Here's the tricky part that took me hours to figure out.

First, Private Internet Access currently relies on net-tools (primarily netstat. Also ifconfig (which is installed on Solus) and route). Now, the problem here is that net-tools is a deprecated set of utilities and Solus, being ahead of the curve, removed it from their repositories early. No worries, we can still install it.

First, install some utilities.

```bash
sudo eopkg it -c system.devel
sudo eopkg it git
```

Now we will install net tools. I recommend running each line one at a time.

```bash
cd /opt
sudo git clone https://github.com/ecki/net-tools.git
cd net-tools
sudo make # Press enter a bunch of times when asked the questions
```

Almost there! Now we will install only the needed utilities through symbolic links

### 6

The final step is to create two more symlinks.

```bash
sudo ln -s $PWD/route /sbin/
sudo ln -s $PWD/netstat /sbin/
# Solus already comes with ifconfig, but it functions a little differently than the ifconfig version we need
sudo ln -s $PWD/ifconfig /sbin/
```

You should be able to connect to the PIA VPN with ease now. Enjoy!

Note that all of the complex stuff we did **only has to be done once**. Private Internet Access will update itself. Well, you have to click a button to update but it will let you know.
